## Week 4 report

### Hours used this week
16

### What I've done this week
- Better test values! The tests now use big primes generated by the program(1024bits) and random size primes that are 500-2000 bits. The tests also use their multiples as composite numbers. This made running the tests really slow so I only generated 10 big primes and 10 primes with random sizes. The tests take 3-4min to run. 
- Implimented tests for decryptor
- Intergration test makes sure the input message is same as the output. 
- Testing document (not done)
- I changed Euler's totient function to Carmichael's totient function because I read that's the proper way to do it as it [seems to be much faster](https://chemejon.io/how-the-rsa-cryptosystem-works/)? The Carmichaels is also much easier to compute becaues it can be computed without unneccessary functions. This means that modular inverse function is not needed and it is commented out in the latest code. The totient is now calculated `t = ((p - 1) * (q - 1)) // gcd((p-1),(q-1))` which follows the wikipedia page and d is computed `self.d = pow(self.e, -1, t)` which is `d = e**-1 % t`. The tests works with this way and I tested that both ways (eulers or carmichaels) return same value for d so the algorithm doesnt change. 

### How the project has developed this week
- Finished the tests, maybe(?)

### What I learnt this week (or what im trying to learn this week)
How to write a good document and explain what i have done in a understandable way.

### What challanges I faced this week
All good :) 


Questions:
1. How much of the code should be documented? It all seems obvious to me so I am not sure how much should be commented.
2. I don't really know what to with the program since the tests and program is done so is there any way I could improve it more apart from documentation? (I am aiming for grade 5)
3. Must the instruction document be a separate document or is it fine if the instructions are on the readme.md?

### What I will do next week
Write documents, peer review and fix program if needed. 

